\section{Kysely}
Kysely is a relatively young query builder in the TypeScript ecosystem, aiming
to replace Knex.js by offering the same query composition power while providing
superior type support for query composition and results. Although its
development only began in earnest in 2021, the package has gained traction since
2022, as it matured and continued to be actively developed, which also means
possible breaking changes.

Compared to Knex.js, Kysely supports fewer database engines and SQL dialects
out-of-the-box, with native support for MySQL, PostgreSQL, and SQLite. However,
third-party drivers are available for several other (albeit more exotic)
databases. One of the driving forces behind Kysely's creation was Knex.js's
excessive permissiveness, which limited its type support capabilities. Kysely
addresses this issue while retaining the strengths of query composition. Though
the order of operations in Kysely may sometimes differ from SQL, this does not
pose a significant problem.

Its excellent type guarantees make it an attractive choice, especially compared
to more expressive packages. Kysely can also be further enhanced with Model
classes through the third-party package kysely-orm. However, due to its limited
usage and lack of updates reflecting the latest Kysely API changes, it was not
considered for comparison here. To generate type definitions, developers can use
introspection with the \textit{kysely-codegen} package or an alternative schema
specification via \textit{prisma-kysely}. Kysely also provides in built support
for database migrations, although it lacks the CLI that other packages, such as
Knex.js provide.

Distributed with both CommonJS and EcmaScript dependency specifications, Kysely
is compatible with both dialects and is licensed under the MIT License. Despite
its youth, the package has already amassed over 53,000 weekly downloads on npm
and over 4,600 stars on GitHub. Most issues reported are enhancement
suggestions, however due to the package's young age, there obviously can't be
any issues open for as long as some in older repositories.

Kysely's active development has led to frequent updates and enhancements, such
as improved documentation published during the writing of this thesis. While the
web document may be brief compared to more established packages like Knex, it
covers all essential information. The package's type annotations provide
excellent documentation, explanations, and multiple usage examples and are the
best example of function annotation in all packages considered in this
comparison. With zero dependencies apart from peer dependencies for database
drivers, Kysely is a lightweight and efficient solution.

In summary, Kysely is a promising query builder in the TypeScript ecosystem,
seeking to surpass Knex.js with its superior type support and powerful query
composition capabilities. Although it currently supports fewer database engines
and SQL dialects, its performance and type guarantees make it an attractive
choice for developers. Its active development, compatibility with various
dependency specifications, and high-quality documentation contribute to Kysely's
growing appeal within the TypeScript community.

\subsection*{Performance in benchmarks}

Regarding performance, the Kysely package consistently outperformed or matched
Knex, which boasts a comparatively rich set of features. While Kysely does not
offer parsing for types such as Big Integer, its handling remains consistent
with that of the pg driver. Like many other packages, Kysely lacks support for
explicit transaction control, above encapsulation into one. However, this is at
least supplemented with raw SQL queries inside the encapsulation. This will
however result in additional call of COMMIT or ROLLBACK at the end of the
encapsulation, even though the transaction was finished manually, and such
behaviour is usually reserved for ORMs which abstract the database access
further than common query builders.

Another advantage of Kysely is its utilization of tagged strings, akin to the
approach employed by @databases/pg when composing raw SQL queries. This method
proves more comprehensible than the combination of bindings and function calls
implemented by Knex. Consequently, the Kysely package offers an appealing
balance of performance and usability, making it a viable option for various
database management tasks.
