\section{MikroORM}

MikroORM, a project developed by Czech programmer Martin Ad√°mek, has emerged as
an ORM solution that offers both versatility and ease of use. With a focus on
implicit transactions using the Unit of Work pattern, MikroORM distinguishes
itself from other ORM packages by offering native support for NoSQL databases,
specifically MongoDB, alongside support for traditional relational databases
such as MySQL, MariaDB, PostgreSQL, and SQLite. At the time of writing,
MikroORM has garnered significant attention, with 189,128 weekly downloads and
5,777 stars on GitHub.

The internal architecture of MikroORM is powered by Knex, a popular SQL query
builder library, which allows developers to access the underlying query builder
with type support provided by MikroORM's definitions. Users can therefore
utilize the full power of knex while benefiting from the additional features and
abstractions MikroORM provides. Database models are represented using classes
with decorators, making creating relationships between entities intuitive
through explicit @OneToOne, @OneToMany, and @ManyToMany decorators that
translate seamlessly from the conceptual schema of the database. Furthermore,
MikroORM offers an EntityGenerator package that allows developers to generate
these definitions based on an existing database schema automatically.

Regarding compatibility, MikroORM supports compiled TypeScript and native
TypeScript execution using ts-node. However, it does not support alternative
runtimes like Deno due to various limitations, including dependencies. Speaking
of dependencies, MikroORM relies on several well-known JavaScript packages for
parsing and metadata reflection, which the package utilizes for establishing
relationships and maintaining context.

The documentation for MikroORM is comprehensive, providing all the necessary
information for developers to utilize the package effectively. While the types
do not direct link to the documentation, they include basic descriptions of the
methods, which aids in understanding their usage. MikroORM also offers support
for migrations and seeding, with migrations generated by analyzing the
differences between the database schema and the schema defined within MikroORM.
It also supports read replica connections using random selection for which
instance to use for the query.

In summary, MikroORM represents a robust and flexible ORM solution that caters
to many database types, from traditional relational databases to NoSQL databases
like MongoDB. With its focus on implicit transactions and an intuitive approach
to defining relationships through decorators, MikroORM has become an attractive
choice for developers seeking a versatile and user-friendly ORM package.

\subsection*{Performance in benchmarks}

The Mikro ORM package distinguished itself in performance benchmarks primarily
due to its unique features. In addition to standard query handling, the package
facilitates field matching using JavaScript native regular expressions, which
are subsequently parsed and translated into SQL queries. Another remarkable
result was observed in the JSONColumn latency test, where MikroORM
significantly outpaced even the pgTyped package. This achievement is not
attributed to superior database connection performance but to the package's
Entity Manager. This internal cache/repository is designed for particular
contexts. It caches the current state based on the object's primary key values,
enabling rapid data retrieval from application memory rather than querying the
database. However, this approach may introduce inconsistencies, prompting
MikroORM to implement optimistic locking for fields potentially
impacted by such issues.

Relations are incorporated using the \texttt{populate} option, which permits dot
notation for further related entities and filtering. While not strictly typed,
simple nested objects have enough type support to provide essential information
for query composition and function as anticipated. The results are well-typed,
although BigInteger and Decimal types are returned as strings. Transaction
support with a direct control sequence API is also implemented. For instances
where the integrated interface lacks flexibility, pre-typed Knex is
accessible for most queries.

Entities in MikroORM are straightforward to implement, although documentation
for their use with complex decomposition tables is limited and has to be
implemented through a standard relations between three tables. A minor issue
arose due to an undocumented difference between the \texttt{columnType} and
\texttt{type} options; however, the package's developer promptly addressed the
concern. Overall, MikroORM offers a compelling balance of features and
performance, making it a viable choice for various applications.
