\section{pgTyped}
PgTyped, primarily developed by Adel Salakh, is an open-source package that,
while not technically an ORM or query builder, offers unique functionality for
TypeScript developers. It analyzes SQL queries written by developers and,
through database introspection, creates typed helper methods for executing those
queries. This package is designed specifically for TypeScript, resulting in
excellent typing but occasionally leading to complex errors, a common issue with
other highly typed language-based packages like Kysely.

The package is compatible only with PostgreSQL, as each database requires its
own parser and introspection process. PgTyped uses the 'pg' connection package,
which behaves differently across databases. It provides complete SQL flexibility
with minimal overhead, allowing developers to use it without limitations
compared to direct SQL queries. However, it lacks the abstraction typically
found in ORM or query builder packages, making direct comparisons challenging.

PgTyped supports both ESM and CommonJS dependency initialization, ensuring
excellent compatibility at the expense of a slightly larger package size. It is
released under the MIT license, a highly permissive option. Its popularity ranks
relatively low, with its main package, "\texttt{@pgtyped/cli}" receiving only
about 10,000 downloads weekly. On GitHub, it has more stars but still falls
within the lowest third of the packages compared.

The package is well-supported, with regular version releases and active issue
resolution. Most long-lasting issues are feature requests rather than bug
reports. As the package is divided into development and runtime components, the
CLI package can afford more dependencies than combined packages. The runtime
dependency has only three direct dependencies: the widely-used \texttt{chalk}
and \texttt{debug} packages, and the parser dependency, which adds
\texttt{antlr4ts} for ANTLR 4 (ANother Tool for Language Recognition) grammar
functionality in TypeScript/JavaScript.

The documentation is of high quality, providing examples and a quick start guide
that covers the essentials for using the package. While the generated types lack
method information, the original query is included in the Javadoc annotation,
making it easily accessible during development. PgTyped is a unique and flexible
package for TypeScript developers working with PostgreSQL. However, it may
provide a different abstraction level for those seeking a traditional ORM or
query builder solution.
